Document Tempo monitor tab and span RED metrics (#11)
max-cx/openshift-docs: modules/distr-tracing-tempo-config-spanmetrics.adoc

> ////
> This module included in the following assemblies:
> // * distr_tracing_tempo/distr-tracing-tempo-configuring.adoc
> ////

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * distr_tracing_tempo/distr-tracing-tempo-configuring.adoc

```

:_content-type: REFERENCE
[id="distr-tracing-tempo-config-spanmetrics_{context}"]

> = Configure monitor tab in Jaeger UI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Configuration of the Monitor tab in the Jaeger UI
```

> Trace data contains rich information and most importantly the data is normalized across instrumented languages and frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trace data contains rich information, and the data is normalized across instrumented languages and frameworks.
```

> Therefore, additional metrics can be extracted from traces. These metrics are request count, duration and error count (RED).

Reviewer: Serial comma:
```suggestion
Therefore, additional metrics can be extracted from traces. These metrics are request count, duration, and error count (RED).
```

> The metrics can be visualized in Jaeger console in the Monitor tab.

Reviewer: As a reader, I'm assuming that there is a tab titled "Monitor". Let me know if this isn't correct.
```suggestion
The metrics can be visualized in Jaeger console in the *Monitor* tab.
```

> The metrics are derived from spans in the OpenTelemetry collector, then scraped from the collector by the Prometheus deployed in the user-workload monitoring stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metrics are derived from spans in the OpenTelemetry Collector that are scraped from the Collector by the Prometheus deployed in the user-workload monitoring stack.
```

> Jaeger UI queries these metrics from the Prometheus endpoint and visualizes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Jaeger UI queries these metrics from the Prometheus endpoint and visualizes them.
```

> == OpenTelemetry collector configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== OpenTelemetry Collector configuration
```

> The OpenTelemetry collector needs to configure `spanmetrics` connector which derives metrics from traces and exports the metrics in the Prometheus format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenTelemetry Collector requires a configured `spanmetrics` connector, which derives metrics from traces and exports the metrics in the Prometheus format.
```

> .OpenTelemetry collector CR for span RED

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.OpenTelemetry Collector custom resource for span RED
```

[source,yaml]
----
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: otel
spec:
  mode: deployment
  observability:
    metrics:
      enableMetrics: true <1>
  config: |
    connectors:
      spanmetrics: <2>
        metrics_flush_interval: 15s

    receivers:
      otlp: <3>
        protocols:
          grpc:
          http:

    exporters:
      prometheus: <4>
        endpoint: 0.0.0.0:8889
        resource_to_telemetry_conversion:
          enabled: true # by default resource attributes are dropped

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [otlp, spanmetrics] <5>
        metrics:
          receivers: [spanmetrics] <6>
          exporters: [prometheus]
----

> <1> Creates `ServiceMonitor` custom resource to enable scraping of the Prometheus exporter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Creates the `ServiceMonitor` custom resource to enable scraping of the Prometheus exporter.
```

> <2> Spanmetrics connector receives traces and exports metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> The Spanmetrics connector receives traces and exports metrics.
```

> <3> OTLP receiver to receive spans in the OpenTelemetry protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> The OTLP receiver to receive spans in the OpenTelemetry protocol.
```

> <4> Prometheus exporter is used to export metrics in the Prometheus format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<4> The Prometheus exporter is used to export metrics in the Prometheus format.
```

<5> Spanmetrics connector is configured as exporter in traces pipeline.

> <6> Spanmetrics connector is configured as receiver in metrics pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> The Spanmetrics connector receives traces and exports metrics.
<3> The OTLP receiver to receive spans in the OpenTelemetry protocol.
<4> The Prometheus exporter is used to export metrics in the Prometheus format.
<5> The Spanmetrics connector is configured as exporter in traces pipeline.
<6> The Spanmetrics connector is configured as receiver in metrics pipeline.
```

== Tempo configuration

> The `TempoStack` CR needs to enable the monitor tab and set the Prometheus endpoint to Thanos querier service to query the data from the user-defined monitoring stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `TempoStack` custom resource must specify the following: the *Monitor* tab is enabled, and the Prometheus endpoint is set to the Thanos querier service to query the data from the user-defined monitoring stack.
```

> .TempoStack CR with enabled monitor tab

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.TempoStack custom resource with the enabled Monitor tab
```

[source,yaml]
----
kind:  TempoStack
apiVersion: tempo.grafana.com/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: simplest
spec:
  template:
    gateway:
      enabled: false <1>
    queryFrontend:
      jaegerQuery:
        enabled: true
        monitorTab:
          enabled: true <2>
          prometheusEndpoint: https://thanos-querier.openshift-monitoring.svc.cluster.local:9091 <3>
        ingress:
          type: route
----

> <1> Gateway is enabled because the monitor tab is not supported thorough the gateway deployment.
> <2> Enables monitoring tab in Jaeger console.
> <3> The Thanos querier service name from user-workload monitoring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<1> Gateway must be enabled because the Monitor tab is not supported thorough the gateway deployment.
<2> Enables the monitoring tab in the Jaeger console.
<3> The service name for Thanos Querier from user-workload monitoring.
```

.OpenTelemetry collector CR for span RED
[source,yaml]
----
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
metadata:
  name: otel
spec:
  mode: deployment
  observability:
    metrics:
      enableMetrics: true <1>
  config: |
    connectors:
      spanmetrics: <2>
        metrics_flush_interval: 15s

    receivers:
      otlp: <3>
        protocols:
          grpc:
          http:

    exporters:
      prometheus: <4>
        endpoint: 0.0.0.0:8889
        resource_to_telemetry_conversion:
          enabled: true # by default resource attributes are dropped

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          exporters: [otlp, spanmetrics] <4>
        metrics:
          receivers: [spanmetrics] <5>
          exporters: [prometheus]
----
<1> Spanmetrics connector receives traces and exports metrics.
<2> OTLP receiver to receive spans in the OpenTelemetry protocol.
<3> Prometheus exporter is used to export metrics in the Prometheus format.
<4> Spanmetrics connector is configured as exporter in traces pipeline.
<5> Spanmetrics connector is configured as receiver in metrics pipeline.

// TODO Max please fix this appropriately

> The setup as well requires to configure the user-workload monitoring stack to scrape the Prometheus endpoint of the collector - https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/pull/60953/files#diff-bd0dc510dd646c60e63a7daf0b9d22eb7525adc8467753a6bdb37948345992ddR7

Author: @max-cx this should point to this document https://github.com/max-cx/openshift-docs/pull/10/files#diff-ff751529c1b337a1d13c6471f9d002d28fba1ca7b53680b227fe755203503f4e
